---
title: "Game Review: The Outer Worlds"
date: 2021-12-12
description: "A casual review of a game I played recently."
tags: [obsidian, outer worlds, game design]
draft: false
---

This will be the first in what I hope will be a continuous series of reviews of games I’ve played, both video and non-video. Do keep in mind that what I say here is just my opinion, and is not a reflection of the overall quality of the game or experiences of other players. While I’ve also talked about *The Outer Worlds* [here before](https://jackburkhardt.com/blog/cannibalism-done-right/), this will be a more general review of the game. I also won’t be doing any expository sections for the games I review, since those are already done much better by more formal reviews or by Wikipedia. All of my reviews will contain spoilers, so consider this a warning if you’d like to play for yourself first. 

I’ve played Outer Worlds twice now, once at launch and again over the past week. Each playthrough was about 25 hours, though if I slowed down and worked to do every quest and piece of content then it could probably reach 30-35 hours. My first playthrough was as a general do-good character with specialization in speech and tech skills. I sided with the Deserters at Emerald Vale, told Lilya Hagen that she was nuts, and eventually sided with Phineas. I also did almost every companion quest, save for maybe Nyoka and Felix. My second playthrough was as a self-interested, egotistical character who wanted to gain as much power over Halcyon as possible. I had specialization in guns, science, medicine, and intimidation (and inadvertently persuasion, due to the way the skill leveling system works). I sided with the deserters again (but for different reasons), did all of the Sublight quests to bleed Lilya of money, and begrudgingly sided with the Board. Many times I ended up subverting what the quest-givers or their factions wanted of me in favor of my own goals – sparing characters I was tasked to kill, not giving back items I was told to collect, pocketing extra bits, etc.

Overall, I think Outer Worlds is a great game that plays well to the strengths and styles of Obsidian as a studio. The game seems like it was designed as an absurd commentary on the stereotypical corporate/bureaucratic structure, and in that sense it was executed perfectly. I cannot emphasize how hilarious and well-made the Halcyon colony is, and you get sucked into the world while you’re playing despite the game being pretty short. The Outer Worlds has a lot of amusing dialog lines, quests, and items that all work together to build the over-the-top corporatist atmosphere of Halcyon. The player also has opportunities to engage with the world’s absurdity as well through a wide variety of quest resolutions, dialog options, and experimental science weapons. Companions feel useful and each has a unique personality and ability about them, and players have a large amount of control over companion behavior and upgrades. I’m not an RPG expert, but based on what I saw in my playthroughs there seems to be a decent amount of flexibility for players to specialize and roleplay while also being accessible enough to casual players (like myself). 

I’ve seen people make comparisons between this game and games like Fallout: New Vegas which, while being made by the same studio, are otherwise extremely different games, most notably in scope. I followed Outer Worlds a lot before launch, and many fans kept touting it as some spiritual successor to New Vegas, only to be sorely disappointed when it was not anything like it. About the most the two share is being Obsidian RPGs, but that’s really where things start and end. Outer Worlds is shorter than New Vegas. Its worlds are smaller and less open. There are fewer factions to side with and quests to complete. But as the studio emphasized before launch, time (money) and scope were essential factors in the creation of The Outer Worlds that shaped its design. I’m glad the game did very well and that Obsidian was acquired by Microsoft; it gives me hope that Outer Worlds 2 will be a chance for Obsidian to dig into this IP with fewer concerns over money, time, and risk.

As with all good RPGs, the Outer Worlds gave me a lot of flexibility over small choices in the world. I could shoot anyone, steal anything, or say pretty much whatever I wanted to any character. I can be as much of a goody two-shoes as possible or a total psychopath, and the game gives me enough degrees of freedom to pursue whichever path I choose. The game doesn’t chastise or shame the player for particular choices, but rather allows entities within the game world (factions, companions, etc) to react naturally. While some of the game’s fundamental mechanics, like combat, consumables, stealth, modding, etc were pretty simple and nothing to write home about, their simplicity works because the game’s levels are designed to support any combination of them. As I mentioned before, the companions in this game are some of the best that I’ve played among similar types of games. They interact with one another, the world, you, and the people you’re talking to. They each have well-written backstories, goals, and personalities and don’t impede the player during questing or combat. Future games should take note of this type of companion system design.

A gripe I do have with The Outer Worlds is that while I did have a lot of control over small choices, I felt like I had very little control over the big ones. The Board’s path felt like it had a lot less content and depth put into it than Phineas’, and there was also no wildcard path to be found save for the dumb ending of sending the Hope into the sun. Your options for a normal playthrough are the Board or Phineas, and that’s it. In my second playthrough I wanted desperately to doublecross both Sophia and Phineas, which ended up not being possible, so then I wanted to kill both of them, which also is not possible without ending up completing one of the two main quests. Having only two main endings isn’t the end of the world, except I felt that the Phineas ending was the objectively better one and there was no real reason to choose the Board ending, even for my power-hungry character. The Phineas ending turns Halcyon into a happy, thriving colony while the Board ending sees the colony slowly decline and only those in Byzantium seem to benefit. These options just felt too binary and lacked enough complexity to give me a reason to be seriously torn over them. In addition, some of the times the game tried to seem genuine and weighty got overshadowed by the absurd nature of the game world and made me take those serious topics and moments less seriously.

I also felt that the characters that represented both endings (Phineas Welles and Sophia Akande) had some shortcomings. The game tries to hint at flaws with Phineas and his plans, such as by having characters point out his unhealthy obsession with the Hope, but it never really gets built on much even when you’re talking him down at the end of the Board path. Most of the time he is just portrayed as an infallible hero who can do no wrong and wants to save the colony. Similarly, Sophia is an even more bland character who seems to exist just as a face to be associated with the Board ending. She has no real personality or charisma about her, and it’s unclear to me what the writer’s goals were with her character or what she was supposed to represent. In both playthroughs, I felt very detached from the two characters leading to a sentiment of being less like “the unplanned variable” and more so like “the errand boy”. Phineas is stuck on his ship behind glass for the whole game, and Sophia stays in her office and gets all of her information from reports on you. Neither act passionately about what they’re doing or their end goal, causing me to also lack passion for either of their paths (this was an issue more so with Sophia than Phineas). 

In all, I did enjoy The Outer Worlds, enough to play through it twice. Mostly though, I enjoyed the *world* of The Outer Worlds, while the actual resolutions to the game and some of the story elements left me unsatisfied. It feels like there’s a lot of great worldbuilding happening on small scales for characters and locations, but I still know very little about Halcyon itself, what’s going on with Earth, and how things got to be the way they are today. It seems like I’ve spent a lot of time in my writing critiquing this game, but it is done so out of love and genuine enjoyment for what the game offers. This is the first game in a brand new IP for Obsidian and I’m still excited to see where the studio goes with Outer Worlds 2.

